hey it's me Destin welcome back to
smarter every day I'm currently sitting
in an airport with my oldest son and we
are on our way to Idaho where did
Superman get his superpowers scraped on
the planet Krypton what about Batman how
did he get his superpowers do you think
people can learn superpowers yes I'm a
me too
here's the deal today's smarter every
day is in collaboration with Bill and
Melinda Gates who every year write a
letter about how to make the world a
better place
this year the letter is about
superpowers for good if you could have a
superpower for good what would it be if
you watch smarter every day for any
length of time you know that I would
want my superpower to be flight but not
like Superman I would want to become a
pilot
I'm actively working on it actually when
I was younger I read this book it was
called through gates of splendor by
Elizabeth Elliot and in the book I met a
guy named Nate Saint this was the first
time I realized you could use your
technical abilities to help other people
whenever there's a natural disaster like
a tsunami or an earthquake often
governments will send aid to these
really tiny nations who don't have the
infrastructure to get it out to the
isolated people that need it
that's where superheroes come in these
guys fly the aid up into the bush and
get it to the people who need it so they
don't smarter every day I want to go to
the organization that Nate worked for
it's called the mission aviation
fellowship and learn how these guys
train to become real-life superheroes
okay here we are we're at MAF
headquarters in Nampa Idaho and this is
Aaron he let me stay at his house last
night and we're gonna meet Brian right
yep all right cool
are you Brian I'm Destin nice to meet
you how you doing meet Brian Shep's and
cheap training pilot for the MAF I
figured out pretty quick that Brian's an
extremely humble man despite the fact
that he spent over a decade flying in
the jungles of Ecuador which makes him
somewhat of a legend now he travels all
over the world teaching the next
generation of pilots and mechanics so
they can fly safely in crazy conditions
so you you basically trained superheroes
right well pretty much every day by your
definition yeah we go places that are
that are hard to get
if roads come in or other transportation
systems come in we leave we go to
another part of the world that's hard to
get to this airplane is a good
combination between being able to carry
and being able to get in and out of a
short airstrip we have a heavy-duty gear
the attire is a bigger size we have
gravel guards to keep rocks and things
from hitting the town
rubber abrasion boot on the tail to
deflect rocks tip extenders on the wings
a fuel tank for extra range if we need
it a fuel tank in the tip here that's an
extra 15 gallons on a side his cuff here
it adds a little bit more aerodynamic
grip into slower higher angles of attack
we have a mirror over here so that we
can see if we have any smoke or fire or
oil we have a cargo pod underneath we
can put cargo in the aircraft without
having to tie it down here we can just
open the door and we can slide in stock
pigs and chickens and things that if
you're not exactly you're not
exaggerating you you ship livestock oh
yeah we carry anything crocodiles snakes
you name it if it needs to be
transported we can transport it Brian
agreed to take me up into the mountains
to teach me a little bit about flying in
rough terrain we strapped in and headed
up to the wilderness of central Idaho
where the first thing he wanted to teach
me was how to fly through a valley if
you're forced to fly below the
mountaintops the untrained pilot in
terrain would fly right up the middle
and go right through the middle of that
pass the trained pilot knows I need to
be able to turn out of here yeah because
if you go through the middle and you
take a turn left or right right half of
the valley to work with right what we do
is we work with the whole valley then we
have the whole valley to turn with how
do you do that we move over to one side
or the other let's go ahead and move
over to the right side here and so the
whole idea is can you see how much room
I have over there to turn around in
that's you're out that's my out but I
have to be able to turn to get there
nothing out there clear go ahead and
turn we just had about four inches of
manifold pressure you're pulling back to
maintain altitude 45 degrees of Bank yep
oh just a turn you didn't even use a
third of it think about what Brian is
saying here if you lose an engine you're
going to start to descend even though it
feels more dangerous because you're so
close hugging the mountain is your
clearest bit for survival how many
people would you say that you have saved
over the years from things like disease
or medical extractions things like that
oh my goodness I don't even know if I
could hazard a guess
we actually would do teams that would go
in and minister vaccinations for kids
almost all of the kids in the jungles of
Ecuador where I flow they receive their
vaccinations because we flew the doctors
there when you're transporting a vaccine
you have to worry about what's called
cold chain management
if a vaccine warms up it loses its
potency so even if the medicine is in
country you can't get it to the people
who need it in time if you have to hide
for days across rough terrain and
through water this is why airplanes are
like having a superpower you can get the
vaccine to the people who need it in
minutes instead of days there was a
meningitis outbreak in him in him in a
valley that was completely isolated
because of snow on the roads could get
to it for like four months out of the
year and the nurse in the village called
and we were able to package up 300 vials
of the treatments the serum fly up there
and drop those out of the airplane and
only one of the little vials broke out
of 300 I think you did a good job of
packaging those that's amazing he's like
the egg drop competition in school only
that's right that's gonna save
somebody's life and death that's right I
can tell you from experience that the
hardest part of flying is making a good
landing so I asked Brian to show me an
example of the air strips that jungle
pilots might have to land on these
strips are often cut into the jungle
with machetes so they're very short and
very narrow the craziest thing about
these runways is that you often have to
commit either they're so short that you
have one chance to take off or there's a
mountain in the way and you can't do a
go-around if you miss the approach once
you commit you either have to do it
right or you crash this is the width of
the Atlanta runway and this is the width
of the dirt runway that Brian is about
to land on I looked it up it's one-tenth
as long and oh by the way just to make
it interesting it's pointing uphill with
a huge bump right in the middle this
means that instead of gently gliding
down to the ground we have to pull up at
exactly the right second and start
flying uphill or we're going to smash
and pancake into the dirt the geometry
is such that the hill rises faster than
the plane can pull out so you're
committed you either land or you don't
usually understanding the physics of
what's about to go down makes me calm
but in this case it made me nervous a
little sinker and we're committed
start our flare let's touch it and good
heart breaks and we got stopped by the
wind Safi you were a boss then it that
just shows what what slope can do for us
that's impressive and dirt you can brake
as hard as you want on dirt I could hurt
anything on asphalt you'll slide flap
the tires there's no threat of tipping
over its skills I'm making these
landings every single day which helps
the MAF get help exactly where it's
needed the main thing I learned there
wasn't about the pilots is that people
who learn these skills can use them to
save people in a desperate situation and
basically become superheroes technicians
build the planes IT professionals radio
operators logisticians engineers medical
professionals every technical skill
becomes a superpower if you choose to
use it not to build yourself up but to
help others in their time of need
all right that's what my superpower
would be a big thanks to MAF for helping
me learn a little bit about how they
become superheroes
anyway if you would like to talk about
your superpower for good I'll leave a
link in the video description it's the
first link go read the gates letter
understand what the superpower for good
is all about use the hashtag and tell
people what your superpower for good
would be anyway I'm Destin you're
getting smarter every day have a good
one
for snakebites man up sweep fly live
snakes up to a serpentarium where they
could do the milking and make a van up
that would work specifically for our
area you would fly snakes it hit the
plane with you snakes on a plane right
wait there's a planet really named
crystal no time